Update: FastStore API (#1008)
vtexdocs/dev-portal-content: docs/faststore/docs/api-extensions/extending-api-schema.mdx

> # Extending API schemas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
title: 'Extending API schemas'
---

This guide will teach you how to extend VTEX and third-party APIs to suit your store's needs. By extending these APIs, you'll gain the ability to efficiently access and modify essential data, ensuring seamless customization to meet your specific needs.
```

## Before you begin

<Steps>
### Ensure consistency with API extension best practices

> Even though you can add information to the FastStore API schema, you must be careful not to over-fetch data on your pages. Check the [best practices for fetching data on your storefront](https://developers.vtex.com/docs/guides/faststore/api-extensions-overview#best-practices-for-fetching-data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When extending the FastStore API schema, avoid overfetching data on your storefront. Refer to the [Best practices for fetching data on your storefront](https://developers.vtex.com/docs/guides/faststore/api-extensions-overview#best-practices-for-fetching-data) for more information.
```

Reviewer: Essa frase pode ser mais direta: "Even though you can add information to the FastStore API schema, you must be careful not to"

### Ensure your development server is active

> Ensure that your development server is up and running while developing to observe the changes you make. You can do this by running the command `yarn dev` in your terminal, which will monitor and reflect the changes promptly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that your development server is up and running while developing to observe changes promptly. Use the command `yarn dev` in the terminal to run the development server and monitor changes effectively.
```

</Steps>

## Extending VTEX API Schemas

FastStore streamlines the data utilization from VTEX APIs not directly exposed by the FastStore API.

Since FastStore uses GraphQL, you need to include [type definitions](https://graphql.org/learn/schema/#object-types-and-fields) and [resolvers](https://graphql.org/learn/execution/#root-fields-resolvers) to fetch the desired data. 

> To define new type definitions and resolvers for FastStore using GraphQL, follow the instructions below to create a specific directory structure. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To define new type definitions and resolvers for FastStore using GraphQL, follow the instructions below. 
```

    mkdir resolvers typeDefs
    ```

    > ⚠️ The `src/graphql/vtex/resolvers` and `src/graphql/vtex/typeDefs` paths are mandatory, but you can organize the files inside those directories as you wish.

4. Create an `index.ts` file inside the `resolvers` folder.

> Once you have created the essential folders, you will have a folder structure for the VTEX API Schema Extensions in the `src/graphql/vtex` folder similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have created the necessary folders, you will have a folder structure for the VTEX API Schema Extensions in the `src/graphql/vtex` folder similar to the following:
```

> #### Step 2 - Creating type definitions (`typeDefs`)Your new type definitions set the data structure for your new fields, extended from the existing FastStore API GraphQL queries and types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Step 2 - Creating type definitions (`typeDefs`)
```

Your new type definitions set the data structure for your new fields, extended from the existing FastStore API GraphQL queries and types.

> 1. Create a new `<typeName>.graphql` file inside the `vtex/typeDefs` folder. For example, if we extend the [StoreProduct](https://v1.faststore.dev/reference/api/objects#storeproduct) type
> from the FastStore API, the name of the file should be `product.graphql`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a new `<typeName>.graphql` file inside the `vtex/typeDefs` folder. For example, if we extend the [StoreProduct](https://v1.faststore.dev/reference/api/objects#storeproduct) type from the FastStore API, the name of the file should be `product.graphql`.
```

>     > ℹ️  The organization inside this folder is flexible. You can create multiple typeDefs files or group them all together in one file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > ℹ️  The organization inside the `vtex/typeDefs` folder is flexible. You can create multiple typeDefs files or group them all together in one file.
```

  During the build process and when running the local server file, all `.graphql` files under this directory will be considered.

> 2. To extend `StoreProduct`, let's add a `customData` required field in `product.graphql`, which should return a string value.
> This field can store custom information related to a product in your store. For example, you might use this field to store additional product details that are not in the native FastStore API schema. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. To extend `StoreProduct`, let's add a `customData` required field in `product.graphql`, which should return a string value. This field can store custom information related to a product in your store. For example, you might use this field to store additional product details that are not in the native FastStore API schema. 
```

```graphql graphql/vtex/typeDefs/product.graphql

extend type StoreProduct {
  """
  Custom data extending StoreProduct
  """
  customData: String!
}

```

>     > ⚠️ The typeDefs files must have a `.graphql` extension. Also, `index.ts` is not needed for typeDefs It is only needed for resolvers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > ⚠️ The typeDefs files must have a `.graphql` extension. Also, `index.ts` is necessary for resolvers but not required for typeDefs.
```

![using-root-field-type](https://vtexhelp.vtexassets.com/assets/docs/src/root-field-ts___3a10ec8a1aeba9770c7ee982995d55bc.gif)

3. Open the `index.ts` file inside the `vtex/resolvers` folder and import the resolver, `StoreProductResolver`, you created in the previous step. 

4. Create a `resolvers` object that includes the imported resolvers.

```ts graphql/vtex/resolvers/index.ts

import { default as StoreProductResolver } from './product'

const resolvers = {
  ...StoreProductResolver,
}

export default resolvers
```

Once you have defined these files in the `vtex` folder, the new fields are available to use.

    > ⚠️ If the changes you made are still not available, refer to the troubleshooting section [GraphQL changes not visible during development](https://developers.vtex.com/docs/guides/faststore/api-extensions-troubleshooting#graphql-changes-not-visible-during-development).

## Extending FastStore API with third-party API schemas

As stores grow, so does the possibility of consuming new data that is not provided by default in the FastStore API or other VTEX APIs. 

> This means FastStore must consume new data from third-party APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means your FastStore website may need to consume new data from third-party APIs.
```

### Step by step

#### Step 1 - Preparing the folders and files

> > ⚠️ If you already have the directory structure created in the [Extending VTEX API schemas](/docs/api-extension/extending--api-schema#step-1---preparing-the-folders-and-files),
>   for third-party API schemas, you only need to add the `thirdParty` folder inside `src/graphql`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ⚠️ If you already have the directory structure created in the [Extending VTEX API schemas](/docs/api-extension/extending--api-schema#step-1---preparing-the-folders-and-files), add the `thirdParty` folder inside `src/graphql`.
```

#### Step 3 - Creating query or mutation schemas

When developing a third-party extension, it's essential to create a Query or Mutation schema. This schema is crucial for generating new query entry points to access data. 
Below, you'll find a code example for implementing a third-party extension.

1. Create the `extra.graphql` file inside the `graphql/thirdParty/typeDefs` folder. The `extra.graphql` defines the type definitions in a GraphQL schema file.

```ts graphql/thirdParty/typeDefs/extra.graphql

type ExtraData {
  """
  Data customizing ExtraData
  """
  data: String!
}

type Query {
  extraData: ExtraData
  namedExtraData(name: String!): ExtraData
}
```

2. Create the `extra.ts` file inside the `graphql/thirdParty/resolvers` folder. This file defines the resolvers that handle the logic for the defined queries or mutations. 

```ts graphql/thirdParty/resolvers/extra.ts

const extraDataResolver = {
  Query: {
    extraData: () => {
      return {
        data: 'Extra data',
      }
    },
    namedExtraData: (_, { name }) => {
      return {
        data: `Named extra data: ${name}`,
      }
    },
  },
}

export default extraDataResolver
```

> 3 - In the `graphql/thirdParty/resolvers` folder, create an `index.ts` file to combine all the resolvers into a single object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the `graphql/thirdParty/resolvers` folder, create the `index.ts` file to combine all the resolvers into a single object.
```

```ts graphql/thirdParty/resolvers/index.ts

import { default as StoreExtraResolver } from './extra'

const resolvers = {
  ...StoreExtraResolver,
}

export default resolvers
```

> 4 - With the schema and resolvers in place, you can query the data using GraphQL queries. Here's an example query to access the extra data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. With the schema and resolvers in place, query the data using GraphQL queries. Here's an example query to access the extra data:
```
